First draft of lecture notes (#138)
sweng-epfl/public: lectures/MobilePlatforms/ReadMe.md

We access the Internet more often from our mobile than our desktop or laptop. Most of the digital content we consume we do so on mobiles. We spend hours a day on our mobile, and the vast majority of that time we spend in apps, not on websites.

A simple example of a major change in how we use computing and communication is social media. Most of the world's population uses it. It changes how we work. Even the professional workforce is increasingly dependent on mobiles, for this reason.

### Mobile vs. desktop: Applications

There are many differences between how we write applications for a mobile device vs. a desktop computer. On a desktop, applications can do pretty much whatever they want, whereas, on a mobile, each app is super-specialized. On the desktop, users explicitly starts applications; on mobile, the difference between running or not is fluid: apps can be killed anytime, and they need to be ready to restart.

> On a desktop, you typically have multiple applications active in the foreground, with multiple windows on-screen. The mobile experience is difference: a user's interaction with an app doesn't always begin in the same place, but rather the user's journey often begins non-deterministically. As a result, a mobile app has a more complex structure than a traditional desktop application, with multiple types of components and entry points.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "non-deterministically" means here, the user doesn't tap buttons at random?

Author: Meaning it doesn't start in the same way. The composition of an email could start from the email app, from a photo share, etc.

Reviewer: I would say something like "the user's journey can start from different places" then, since it's still deterministic as far as the user is concerned.

> The execution model on mobiles is more cooperative than on a desktop. For example, a social media app allows you to compose an email, and does so by reusing the email app. Another example is something like WhatsApp, which allows you to take pictures (and does so by asking the Photo app to do it). In essence, apps request services from other apps, and they build upon the functionality of others, which is fundamentally difference from the desktop application paradigm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution model on mobile is more cooperative than on a desktop. For example, a social media app allows you to compose an email, and does so by reusing the email app. Another example is something like WhatsApp, which allows you to take pictures (and does so by asking the Photo app to do it). In essence, apps request services from other apps, and they build upon the functionality of others, which is fundamentally difference from the desktop application paradigm.
```
(it's grammatically correct either way, but for consistency)

### Mobile vs. desktop: Operating environment

One of the biggest differences is in the security model. Think of your parents' PC at home or in an Internet café: there are potentially multiple users that don’t trust each other, each have specific file permissions, every application by default inherits all of a user's permissions, all applications are trusted to run with user's privileges alongside each other.  The operating system prevents one application from overwriting others, but does not protect the I/O resources (e.g., files). One could fairly say that security is somewhat of an afterthought on the desktop.

A mobile OS has considerably stronger isolation. The assumption here is that users might naively install malicious apps, and the goal is to protect users’ data (and privacy) even when they do stupid things. So, each mobile app is sandboxed separately.

When you install a mobile app, it will ask the device for necessary permissions, like access to contacts, camera, microphone, location information, SMS, WiFi, user accounts, body sensors, etc.

> A mobile device is more constrained, e.g., you don't really get "root" access. It provides strong hardware-based isolation and powerful authentication features (like face recognition). E.g., for iPhone's FaceID, the face scan pattern is encrypted and sent to a secure hardware "enclave" in the CPU, to make sure that stored facial data is inaccessible to any party, including Apple.

Reviewer: This is mostly true for modern laptops as well.

Author: Well, it's not true on the MacBook Pro. I (or an app I run) have root access and, as root, an app can do whatever it wants. I don't have FaceID (though it would be nice to have).

Reviewer: Fair enough, some laptops do have fancy 3D cameras but most don't.

We are witnessing today a convergence between desktop and mobile OSes, which will gradually make desktops disappear, and computing will become increasingly more embedded.

### Challenges and opportunities

This new world of mobile presents both opportunities and challenges.

Users are many more, and are more diverse. They have widely differing computer skills. Developers need to focus on ease of use, internationalization, and accessibility.

Platforms are more diverse (think phones, wearables, TVs, cars, e-book readers). Different vendors take different approaches to dealing with this diversity: Apple has the "walled garden" approach, while Android is more like the wild west: Android is open-source, so OEMs (original equipment manufacturers) can customize Android to their devices, so naturally Android runs on tens of thousands of models of devices today.

Mobiles get interesting new kinds of inputs, from multi-touch screens, accelerometers, GPS.  But they also face serious limitations in terms of screen size, processor power, and battery capacity.

> Mobile devices need to (and can be) managed more tightly. Today you can remote-lock a device, you can locate the device, and with software like MDM (mobile device management) you can do everything on the device remotely.  Some mobile carriers even block users from installing certain apps on their devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mobile devices need to (and can be) managed more tightly. Today you can remote-lock a device, you can locate the device, and with software like MDM (mobile device management) you can do everything on the device remotely. Some mobile carriers even block users from installing certain apps on their devices.
```

> App stores or Play stores are digital storefronts for content consumed on device. Today, the success of a mobile platform depends heavily on its app store, which becomes a central hub for content to be consumed on that particular mobile platform. The operator of the store controls apps published in the store (e.g., disallow sexually explicit content, violence, hate speech, anything illegal), which means that the developer needs to be aware of rules and laws in the places where app will be used. Operators typically use automated tools and human reviewers to check apps for malware and terms-of-service violations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App stores are digital storefronts for content consumed on device. Today, the success of a mobile platform depends heavily on its app store, which becomes a central hub for content to be consumed on that particular mobile platform. The operator of the store controls apps published in the store (e.g., disallow sexually explicit content, violence, hate speech, anything illegal), which means that the developer needs to be aware of rules and laws in the places where app will be used. Operators typically use automated tools and human reviewers to check apps for malware and terms-of-service violations.
```
(I think this would confuse students more than anything -- Google's Play store is an app store, but iPhone users may not even remember what Google's app store is called)

## How does a mobile operating environment work?

> A mobile device aims to achieve seemingly contradictory goals: On the one hand, it aims for greater integration than a desktop, to create a more cooperative ecosystem in which to enable apps to provide services to each other. On the other hand, it aims for greater isolation, it wants to offer a stronger sandbox, to protect user data, and to restrict apps from interacting in more complex ways

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A mobile device aims to achieve seemingly contradictory goals: On the one hand, it aims for greater integration than a desktop, to create a more cooperative ecosystem in which to enable apps to provide services to each other. On the other hand, it aims for greater isolation, it wants to offer a stronger sandbox, to protect user data, and to restrict apps from interacting in more complex ways.
```

Each mobile OS makes its own choices for how to do this. In this lecture, we chose to focus on Android, for three reasons:

* it is open-source, so it's easier to understand what it really does
* over 70% of mobiles use Android, there are more than 2.5 billion Android users and more than 3 billion active Android devices, so this is very real
* we will use it in the follow-on course [Software Development Project](https://dslab.epfl.ch/teaching/sweng/proj)

> Android is based on Linux, and things like multi-threading and low-level memory management are all provided by the Linux kernel.  There is a layer, called the hardware abstraction layer (HAL), that provides standard interfaces to specific hardware capabilities, such as the camera or the Bluetooth module. Whenever an application makes a call to access device hardware, Android loads a corresponding library module from the HAL for that hardware component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Android is based on Linux, and things like multi-threading and low-level memory management are all provided by the Linux kernel. There is a layer, called the hardware abstraction layer (HAL), that provides standard interfaces to specific hardware capabilities, such as the camera or the Bluetooth module. Whenever an application makes a call to access device hardware, Android loads a corresponding library module from the HAL for that hardware component.
```

Above the HAL, there is the Android runtime (ART) and the Native C/C++ libraries.

The ART provides virtual machines for executing DEX (Dalvik executable) bytecode, which is specially designed to have a minimal memory footprint. Java code gets turned into DEX bytecode, which can run on the ART.

> Android apps can be written in Kotlin, Java, or even C++. The Android SDK (software development kit) tools compile code + resource files into a so-called Android application package (APK), which is an archive used to install the app. When publishing to the Google Play app store, one generates instead an Android app bundle (ABB), and then Google Play itself generates optimized APKs for the target device that is requesting installation of the app. This is a more practical approach than having the developer produce individual APKs for each device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Android apps can be written in Kotlin, Java, or even C++. The Android SDK (software development kit) tools compile code + resource files into a so-called Android application package (APK), which is an archive used to install the app. When publishing to the Google Play app store, one generates instead an Android app bundle (AAB), and then Google Play itself generates optimized APKs for the target device that is requesting installation of the app. This is a more practical approach than having the developer produce individual APKs for each device.
```
(per https://developer.android.com/guide/app-bundle/faq)

Many core system components (like the ART and HAL) require native libraries written in C/C++. Android provides Java APIs to expose the functionality of these native libraries to apps. This Java APIs framework is layered on top of the ART and native C/C++ libraries. Apps written in C/C++ can use the native libraries directly (this requires the Android native development kit, or NDK).

Within the Java API framework, there are a number of Android features provided through APIs written in Java that provide key building blocks for apps. For example, the View System is used for building the UI. E.g., the Resource Manager is used by apps for accessing localized strings or graphics. E.g., the Activity Manager handles the lifecycle of apps and provides a common navigation back stack (more on this below). And, as a final example, Content Providers enable apps to access data from other apps (e.g., a social media app access the Contacts app) or to share their own data.

> On top of this entire stack are the apps. Android comes with core apps for email, SMS, calendaring, web browsing, contacts, etc. but these apps have no special status, then can be replaced with third-party apps. The point of shipping them with Android is to provide key capabilities to other apps out of the box (e.g., allow multiple apps to have the functionality of sending an SMS without having to write the code for it).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On top of this entire stack are the apps. Android comes with core apps for email, SMS, calendaring, web browsing, contacts, etc. but these apps have no special status, they can be replaced with third-party apps. The point of shipping them with Android is to provide key capabilities to other apps out of the box (e.g., allow multiple apps to have the functionality of sending an SMS without having to write the code for it).
```

* A _Content Provider_ manages data that is shared among apps. Such data can be local (e.g., file system, SQLite DB) or remote on some server. Through a content provider, apps can query / modify the data (e.g., the Contacts data is a content provider: any app with the proper permissions can get contact info and can write contact info).

Remember that any app can cause another app’s component to start. For instance, if WhatsApp wants to take a photo with the camera, it can ask that an activity be started in the Camera app, without the WhatsApp developer having to write the code to take photos--when done, the photo is returned to WhatsApp, and to the user it appears as if the camera is actually a part of WhatsApp.

> To start a component, Android starts the process for target app (if not already running), instantiates the relevant classes (this is because, e.g., the photo-taking activity runs in the Camera process, not WhatsApp's process). You see here an example of multiple entry points: there is no `main()` like in a desktop app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start a component, Android starts the process for target app (if not already running) and instantiates the relevant classes (this is because, e.g., the photo-taking activity runs in the Camera process, not WhatsApp's process). You see here an example of multiple entry points: there is no `main()` like in a desktop app.
```

> Then, to activate a component in another app, you must create an _Intent_ object, which is essentially a message that activates either a specific component (explicit intent) or a type of component (implicit intent).  For activities and services, the intent defines the action to perform (e.g., view or send something) and specifies the URI of the data to act on (e.g., this is an intent to dial a certain phone number). If the activity returns a result, it is returned in an Intent (e.g., let the user pick a contact and return a URI pointing to it).  For broadcast receivers, the intent defines the announcement being broadcast (e.g., if battery is low it includes the BATTERY_LOW string), and a receiver can register for it by filtering on the string. Content providers are not activated by intents but rather when targeted by a request from what's called a Content Resolver, which handles all interaction with the content provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, to activate a component in another app, you must create an _Intent_ object, which is essentially a message that activates either a specific component (explicit intent) or a type of component (implicit intent). For activities and services, the intent defines the action to perform (e.g., view or send something) and specifies the URI of the data to act on (e.g., this is an intent to dial a certain phone number). If the activity returns a result, it is returned in an Intent (e.g., let the user pick a contact and return a URI pointing to it). For broadcast receivers, the intent defines the announcement being broadcast (e.g., if battery is low it includes the `BATTERY_LOW` string), and a receiver can register for it by filtering on the string. Content providers are not activated by intents but rather when targeted by a request from what's called a Content Resolver, which handles all interaction with the content provider.
```

## A mobile app: Structure and lifecycle

The centerpiece of an Android app is the _activity_. Unlike the kinds of programs you've been writing so far, there is no `main()`, but rather the underlying OS initiates code in an _Activity_ by invoking specific callback methods.

An activity provides the window in which the app draws its UI. One activity essentially implements one screen in an app, e.g., 1 activity for a Preferences screen, 1 activity for a Select Photo screen, etc.

> Apps contain multiple screens, each of which corresponds to an activity. One activity is specified as the main activity, i.e., the first screen to appear when you launch the app. Each activity can then start another activity, e.g., the main activity in an email app may provide the screen that shows your inbox, then you have screens for opening and reasing a message, one for writing, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apps contain multiple screens, each of which corresponds to an activity. One activity is specified as the main activity, i.e., the first screen to appear when you launch the app. Each activity can then start another activity, e.g., the main activity in an email app may provide the screen that shows your inbox, then you have screens for opening and reading a message, one for writing, etc.
```

> As a user navigates through, out of, back into an app, the activities in the app transition through diff states. Transitioning from one state to another is handled by specific callbacks that must be implemented in the activity. The activity learns about changes and reacts to when the user leaves and re-enters the activity: For example, a streaming video player will likely pause the video and terminate the network connection when the user switches to another app; when the user returns to the app, it will reconnect to the network and allow the user to resume the video from the same spot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a user navigates through, out of, back into an app, the activities in the app transition through different states. Transitioning from one state to another is handled by specific callbacks that must be implemented in the activity. The activity learns about changes and reacts to when the user leaves and re-enters the activity: For example, a streaming video player will likely pause the video and terminate the network connection when the user switches to another app; when the user returns to the app, it will reconnect to the network and allow the user to resume the video from the same spot.
```

So you must ask who is your audience: Old or young people? Intellectuals or blue-collar workers? Think back to the lecture on personas and user stories.

The UI should enable the user to get around the app easily, and to find quickly what they're looking for. To achieve this, several elements and widgets have emerged from the years of experience of building mobile apps. The [hamburger icons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamburger_button) are used for drop-down menus with further details--they avoid clutter. Home buttons give users a shortcut to home base. Chat bubbles offer quick help through context-sensitive messages.

Personalization of the UI allows adapting to what the user is interested in, keeping the unrelated content away. For example, in the [EPFL Campus app](https://pocketcampus.org/epfl-en) you can select which features you see on the home screen, and so the home screen of two different users is likely to look different.

> In order to maximize readability, emphasize simplicity and clarity, choose adequate font size and image size. Avoid having too many elements on the screen, because that leads to confusion. Offer one necessary action per screen. Use [micro UX animations](https://uxplanet.org/ui-design-animations-microinteractions-50753e6f605c), which are little animations that appear when a specific action is performed or a particular item is hovered or touched; this can increase engagement and interactivity. E.g., hovering over a thumbnail shows details about it. E.g., hover zoom for maximizing the view of a specific part of something.  Keep however the animations minimal, avoid flashiness, make them subtle and clear as to their intent.

Reviewer: I would add something about remaining consistent with Android itself. Users expect specific looks for specific UI elements, for instance.

Reviewer: Also, "hover" is a bit obscure in the context of Android, very few devices have hovering capabilities (only tablets with pens, off the top of my head?)

Author: About Android, yes, good point. Are there some specific elements to mention, that pretty much all Android apps exhibit?

Reviewer: Ah yes the two-level touch thing is I think iOS-only.

Re: Android, a hamburger menu is probably a good example, along with the general fact that Android offers existing controls and users shouldn't reinvent their for, e.g., displaying a list of items, nor should they override the default margins, colors, etc. without a good reason.

Keep in mind _thumb zones_. People use their mobile when they’re standing, walking, riding a bus, so the app should allow them to hold the device and view its screen and provide input in all these situations. So make it easy for the user to reach with their thumb the stuff they do most often. Leverage gesture controls to make it easy for a user to interact with apps--e.g., “holding” an item, “dragging” it to a container, and then “releasing”--but beware to do what users of that device are used to doing, not exotic stuff.

Think of augmented reality and voice interaction, depending on the app, they can be excellent ways to interact with the device.

## The mobile ecosystem

A modern mobile app, no matter how good it is, can hardly survive without plugging into its ecosystem.  

> Most mobile apps are consists of the phone side of the app and the cloud side. Apps interact with cloud services typically over REST APIs, which is an architectural style that builds upon HTTP and JSON to offer CRUD (copy-read-update-delete) operations on objects that are addressed by a URI. You use HTTP methods to access these resources via URL-encoded parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most mobile apps consists of a phone side of the app and a cloud side. Apps interact with cloud services typically over REST APIs, which is an architectural style that builds upon HTTP to offer CRUD (copy-read-update-delete) operations on objects that are addressed by a URI. You use HTTP methods to access these resources via URL-encoded parameters.
```
(REST can use XML as well)

> Aside from the split architecture, apps also interact with the ecosystem through Push notifications. These are automated messages sent to the user by the server of the app that’s working in the background (i.e., not currently open). Each OS (e.g., Android, iOS) has its own push notification service with a specific API that apps can use, and they each operate a push engine in the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from the split architecture, apps also interact with the ecosystem through Push notifications. These are automated messages sent to the user by an app's cloud side. Each OS (e.g., Android, iOS) has its own push notification service with a specific API that apps can use, and they each operate a push engine in the cloud.
```
(the app doesn't have to be open at all, I think this makes it consistent with the mobile/cloud split explained earlier)
